Werner Herzog has made more than 60 films over his illustrious career. His documentaries alone span an impressive topical range, from the life and death of bear enthusiast Timothy Treadwell (Grizzly Man) to people who choose to live and work in Antarctica (the Oscar-nominated Encounters at the End of the World) or a haunting exploration of the oldest human paintings in France's Chauvet Cave (Cave of Forgotten Dreams). His latest offering, Theater of Thought, tackles what might be his most ambitious subject yet: the mysterious inner workings of the brain.


Theater of Thought premiered in 2022 at the Telluride Film Festival in Colorado and is now getting a theatrical release. Herzog's inspiration grew out of his conversations with Rafael Yuste, a Columbia University neurobiologist who also served as scientific advisor on the film. "How can we read thoughts?" he writes in his director's statement. "Can you implant a chip in your brain and in my brain, and see my new film without a camera? Why is it that some young people immerse themselves in video games and become addicted to completely artificial worlds? Sometimes mice even prefer invented cartoon worlds, so who is the ghost writer of our mind, of our reality?"


The topic might be scientific in nature, but Theater of Thought is not really a science documentary, despite Herzog's use of the classic talking head format. It's more of a personal, almost quixotic quest, with plenty of random branching digressions along the way. "It was like a road movie, one Monument Valley and one Grand Canyon, then one Mount Everest after the other," Herzog told Ars. "You just couldn't stop wondering and enjoying." For the viewer, it's as much a journey through the eccentric workings of Herzog's endlessly curious, nimble mind.


That mind is partly revealed through Herzog's running narration, such as when he muses about collective behavior and whether fish have souls—a digression sparked by his interview with Siri co-inventor Tom Gruber. "In the background, I saw his TV screen still on, we didn't switch it off, and I saw some very, very strange school of fish," said Herzog. "I asked him about the school of fish, which he had filmed himself. And all of a sudden, I'm only interested in the fish and common behavior. Why do they behave in big schools, in unison? Why do they do that? Do they dream? And if they think, what are they thinking about? I immerse the audience into a very strange form of underwater landscape and behavior of fish."
We glimpse the inner workings of Herzog's mind in the kinds of questions he asks his subjects, such as when he queries IBM's Dario Gil, who works on quantum computing, about his passion for fishing, eliciting an enthusiastic smile in response. He agrees to interview University of Washington neuroscientist Christof Koch after Koch's early-morning row on the Puget Sound and includes music from New York University neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux's band, the Amygdaloids, in the film's soundtrack. He asks married scientists Cori Bargmann and Richard Axel about music, their dinner conversations, and the linguistic capabilities of parrots. In so doing, he brings out their innate humanity, not just their scientific expertise.


"That's what I do. If you don't have it in you, you shouldn't be a filmmaker," said Herzog. "But you see, also, the joy of getting into all of this and the joy of meeting these scientists. We are talking about speaking parrots. What if two parrots learned a language that is already extinct and they would speak to each other? What would we make of it? So I'm asking, spontaneously, because I saw it, I sensed it, there was something I should depart completely from scientific quests. And yet there's a deep scientific background to it."


This sense leads Herzog to make some unexpected connections. Case in point: He deftly segues from an interview with LeDoux on his work mapping the mechanisms of fear in the brain to a visit with veteran tightrope walker Philippe Petit. Petit famously performed a high-wire walk between the twin towers of the World Trade Center in 1974, so he knows something about confronting and conquering fear.


At one point, he asks a subject whether it's possible to use brain-reading technology to ask someone who has just died if they are in heaven or hell. Herzog is a filmmaker, so this naturally leads him to a 1930 Soviet silent film called Earth. "It has to do with the joy of filmmaking," Herzog said of his decision to include a clip from Earth. "The beginning of the film, an old peasant is dying under an apple tree, on a big heap of apples. And all the other peasants surround him, and one of them asks, 'Can you give us some sort of sign, when you are dead, whether there is paradise?' It's such a beautiful beginning of a movie."


For Herzog, making the documentary was about the journey and following the whims of his insatiable curiosity; he was less concerned about finding definitive answers. It's a wise approach, given how much we have to learn about how the physical mass of tissue that is the brain gives rise to complex human thought and consciousness. "Not a single one of the scientists, not one, could even tell you what a thought is, and not a single one could even tell you what consciousness is," he said. "There are open questions that will remain open for probably a very, very long time. But it doesn't matter. Let's engage in finding out. I'm comfortable that certain things we'll never know. At the same time, there's this great joy of exploration and trying to get answers, even if they're only incomplete."


Theater of Thought is now playing in select theaters.
Severance was one of the most talked-about TV series of 2022, receiving widespread critical acclaim. We loved the series so much that Ars staffers actually wrote a group review so that everyone could weigh in with their thoughts on the first season, pronouncing it "one of the best shows on TV." Needless to say, we have been eagerly awaiting the second season next month. Apple TV+ just released the official trailer at CCXP24 in São Paulo, Brazil, and it does not disappoint.


(Spoilers for first season below.)


In the world of Severance, people can completely disconnect their work and personal lives. Thanks to a new procedure developed by Lumon Industries, workers can bifurcate themselves into "innies" (work selves) and "outies" (personal selves)—with no sharing of memories between them. This appeals to people like Mark (Adam Scott), who lost his wife in a car crash and has struggled to work through the grief. Why not forget all that pain for eight hours a day?


It's no spoiler to say that things went... badly in S1 as a result of this process. As Ars Deputy Editor Nate Anderson noted at the time, "The show isn't just bonkers—though it is that, too. It's also about the lengths to which we will go to dull or avoid emotional pain, and the ways in which humans will reach out to connect with others even under the most unpromising of circumstances." In the process, Severance brought out "the latent horror of fluorescent lights, baby goats, cubicles, waffles, middle managers, finger traps, and 'work/life balance.' Also cults. And vending machines. Plus corporate training manuals. And talk therapy. Oh, and 'kind eyes.'"


The first season ended on quite the cliffhanger, with several Lumon employees activating an "overtime contingency" to escape the office confines to get a taste for how their "outies" live—and some pretty startling secrets were revealed. S2 will naturally grapple with the fallout from their brief mutiny. Per the official premise:
The trailer opens with the surprising revelation that the four rebels are not in as much trouble as they feared. "What you all did was one of the most painful moments in the history of this company," their supervisor, Milchick (Tramell Tillman), tells them. "But the four of you have become known as the face of severance reform." In other words, they generated massive media interest, which offers at least some temporary protection. It's not likely to last long.


Meanwhile, the fab four must deal with the implications of what they learned about their outies' lives—particularly Mark, whose outie lost his wife, Gemma, a few years before. Only, Innie Mark learned that Gemma is actually Ms. Casey (Dichen Lachman, Lumon's wellness counselor, who is very much alive. Mark wants to free her from Lumon but naturally meets with sinister resistance. Mark still tries to rally the troops to his cause: "If we let this happen to Ms. Casey, who's gonna step up when it happens to us?" It's not clear what happened to Gemma/Ms. Casey, but it's probably nothing good.


The second season of Severance premieres on Apple TV+ on January 17, 2025.
Epidermal electronics attached to the skin via temporary tattoos (e-tattoos) have been around for more than a decade, but they have their limitations, most notably that they don't function well on curved and/or hairy surfaces. Scientists have now developed special conductive inks that can be printed right onto a person's scalp to measure brain waves, even if they have hair. According to a new paper published in the journal Cell Biomaterials, this could one day enable mobile EEG monitoring outside a clinical setting, among other potential applications.


EEGs are a well-established, non-invasive method for recording the electrical activity of the brain, a crucial diagnostic tool for monitoring such conditions as epilepsy, sleep disorders, and brain injuries. It's also an important tool in many aspects of neuroscience research, including the ongoing development of brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). But there are issues. Subjects must wear uncomfortable caps that aren't designed to handle the variation in people's' head shapes, so a clinician must painstakingly map out the electrode positions on a given patient's head—a time-consuming process. And the gel used to apply the electrodes dries out and loses conductivity within a couple of hours, limiting how long one can make recordings.


By contrast, e-tattoos connect to skin without adhesives, are practically unnoticeable, and are typically attached via temporary tattoo, allowing electrical measurements (and other measurements, such as temperature and strain) using ultra-thin polymers with embedded circuit elements. They can measure heartbeats on the chest (ECG), muscle contractions in the leg (EMG), stress levels, and alpha waves through the forehead (EEG), for example.


Ink masters
Yet even e-tattoos have their challenges, such as the aforementioned curved or hairy surfaces, as well as requiring personalized electrode placement design to cover larger areas since biosignals are spatially distributed. So scientists at the University of Texas at Austin and the University of California, Los Angeles, decided to explore the potential of on-tissue printing. Prior work in this area has focused on things like bio-printing hydrogels embedded with cells for tissue regeneration or as strain sensors.


graphical abstract showing the basic experimental setup for applying the e-tattoos with all the parts identified.
Graphical abstract of on-scalp printing of the EEG e-tattoos. Credit: L. Scalco de Vasconcelos et al., 2024
The UTA/UCLA team developed printable biocompatible polymer-based inks that can be applied directly via microjet through short hair onto a lightly moistened scalp. The ink then quickly dries into a soft, stretchable, and conductive, thin film that conforms perfectly to the shape of the scalp. The ink comes in two varieties: one to form electrodes to pick up EEG signals and the other to form highly conductive interconnects that also minimize noise in the readings.


First, a camera is used to map the patient's head, and an algorithm designs the sensor placement to match that and provide instructions to a robotic microjet printer about where to deposit the ink. The printer deposits the ink with sufficient speed to penetrate short hairs on the scalp. There are also short cables that link the printed e-tattoo to a small EEG recorder. Their e-tattoos successfully recorded brain waves from participating subjects.


"This design is ultra-low-profile, mechanically imperceptible to the user," said co-author José del R. Millán of the University of Texas at Austin, a prominent expert in BCIs. "The fact that this device requires less setup and maintenance and the user could eventually wear a hat or a helmet over it means we could achieve longer recording times and learn more about their brain activity."


This new method still requires a certain time commitment from patients, but it is considerably less time-consuming than a standard EEG, and it's cheaper. Right now, it only works with very short hair, so the group's future efforts will focus on improving the application method for longer, thicker hairs, as well as curly hair. (The latter is often an issue for Black patients requiring EEGs since curly hair can push against the cap and reduce contact between the scalp and the electrodes.) They might try robotic fingers or special combs to separate the hair during printing.


The ink also tends to rub off while the patient is sleeping or showering, so the team will also be looking to increase overall robustness and the ink's resistance to friction. One day, the applications might extend not just to EEGs, ECGs, BCIs, and the like but also make it possible to integrate sensors onto internal organs: the cranium, the heart, or on tissue or bone for regenerative purposes.


"Ultimately, it opens the door for the on-body integration of sensing, processing, communication, and power components tailored specifically to the anatomy and needs of the user," the authors concluded.
Ray spiders deploy an unusual strategy to capture prey in their webs. They essentially pull it back into a cone shape and release it when prey approaches, trapping said prey in the sticky silken threads. A few years ago, scientists noticed that they could get the spiders to release their webs just by snapping their fingers nearby, suggesting that the spiders relied at least in part on sound vibrations to know when to strike. Evidence for that hypothesis has now been confirmed in a new paper published in the Journal of Experimental Biology.


Most spider orb webs are static: the spiders weave them and fix them in place and then wait for prey to fly into the webs. That causes the silk threads to vibrate, alerting the spider that dinner is served. There are some species that actively actuate their webs, however, per the authors.


For instance, the triangle weaver spring-loads its triangular web once an insect has made contact so that the threads wrap around the prey in fractions of a second. Bolas spiders seem to detect prey in their vicinity through auditory cues, throwing a line of silk with a sticky end at passing moths to catch them. Ogre-faced spiders also seem to be able to hear potential prey, striking backward with a small silk net held in their front legs. It's a more proactive hunting strategy than merely waiting for prey to fly into a web.


Sarah Han and Todd Blackledge of the University of Akron in Ohio were intrigued by the 2021 observations of ray spiders (Theridiosoma gemmosum) and decided to test the spiders' reactions to sound in the lab, as well as measuring the kinematics of web release. They collected 19 local spiders in the wild and placed each in small inverted terrariums with trays of shallow water underneath to mimic their natural habitat, along with twigs mounted on styrofoam bases to serve as frames for web-building. These included extra small twigs to anchor the tension lines that ray spiders use at the center of their webs to draw it back into a cone like a slingshot.


Along came a spider
The 19 spiders built 26 webs over the testing period. For the experiments, Han and Blackledge used a weighted tuning fork with frequencies in the mid-range for whirring wings for many mosquito species in North America as a control stimulus. They also attached actual mosquitos to thin strips of black construction paper by dabbing a bit of superglue on their abdomens or hind legs. This ensured the mosquitos could still beat their wings when approaching the webs. The experiments were recorded on high-speed video for analysis.


As expected, spiders released their webs when flapping mosquitoes drew near, but the video footage showed that the releases occurred before the mosquitoes ever touched the web. The spiders released their webs just as frequently when the tuning fork was brandished nearby. It wasn't likely that they were relying on visual cues because the spiders were centered at the vertex of the web and anchor line, facing away from the cone. Ray spiders also don't have well-developed eyes. And one spider did not respond to a motionless mosquito held within the capture cone but released its web only when the insect started flapping its wings.


"The decision to release a web is therefore likely based upon vibrational information," the authors concluded, noting that ray spiders have sound-sensitive hairs on their back legs that could be detecting air currents or sound waves since those legs are typically closest to the cone. Static webs are known to vibrate in response to airborne sounds, so it seems likely that ray spiders can figure out an insect's approach, its size, or maybe even its behavior before the prey ever makes contact with the web.


As for the web kinematics, Han and Blackledge determined that they can accelerate up to 504 m/s2, reaching speeds as high as 1 m/s, and hence can catch mosquitos in 38 milliseconds or less. Even the speediest mosquitoes might struggle to outrun that.
The US Capitol building in Washington, DC, is adorned with multiple lavish murals created in the 19th century by Italian artist Constantino Brumidi. These include panels in the Senate first-floor corridors, Room H-144, and the rotunda. The crowning glory is The Apotheosis of Washington on the dome of the rotunda, 180 feet above the floor.


Brumidi worked in various mediums, including frescoes. Among the issues facing conservators charged with maintaining the Capitol building frescoes is delamination. Artists apply dry pigments to wet plaster to create a fresco, and a good fresco can last for centuries. Over time, though, the decorative plaster layers can separate from the underlying masonry, introducing air gaps. Knowing precisely where such delaminated areas are, and their exact shape, is crucial to conservation efforts, yet the damage might not be obvious to the naked eye.


Acoustician Nicholas Gangemi is part of a research group led by Joseph Vignola at the Catholic University of America that has been using laser Doppler vibrometry to pinpoint delaminated areas of the Capitol building frescoes. It's a non-invasive method that zaps the frescoes with sound waves and measures the vibrational signatures that reflect back to learn about the structural conditions. This in turn enables conservators to make very precise repairs to preserve the frescoes for future generations.


It's an alternative to the traditional technique of gently knocking on the plaster with knuckles or small mallets, listening to the resulting sounds to determine where delamination has occurred. Once separation occurs, the delaminated part of the fresco acts a bit like the head of a drum; tapping on it produces a distinctive acoustic signature.


But the method is highly subjective. It takes years of experience to become proficient at this method, and there are only a small number of people who can truly be deemed experts. "We really wanted to put that experience and knowledge into an inexperienced person's hands," Gangemi said during a press briefing at a virtual meeting of the Acoustical Society of America. So he and his colleagues decided to put the traditional knocking method to the test.
Since they didn't want to perform knocking experiments on the actual frescoes—"we're not professionals at this sort of technique"—the researchers created their own surrogate frescoes in the lab and embedded their own defects. In this case, the defects were delaminated areas in the shape of a ginkgo leaf. They embedded that leaf-shaped layer of air on a brick backing structure and then applied two layers of plaster. "We know the shape of the defect, whereas on the real artwork, we might not necessarily know the shape," said Gangemi. "This allowed us to test if we're actually resolving the shape of the defect correctly."


They used a little hammer to tap on the fresh surrogates in a 19x19 grid pattern, recording the radiated sound. Next, they took advantage of advances in signal processing to analyze those recordings and reconstruct the measured resonances back into a color-coordinated grid. For instance, when one is not tapping on the defect area, the resonance shows up as blue, whereas delaminated areas show up as orange.


Among the findings: A resonance between 200 to 500 hertz reveals a substantial difference between delaminated and non-delaminated plaster. Gangemi et al. were able to exploit this feature to examine different frequency bands in hopes of achieving better resolution of the leaf-shaped defect. Higher frequencies, they found, brought the shape into better focus but also added more noise. The researchers were able to identify a "sweet spot" frequency range where the shape is accurately resolved with minimal noise.


In short, "We've proven that these tap tests are viable and that different resolutions can give us different benefits," said Gangemi. This work is largely a proof of principle, but it should be possible to use it as the basis for simple, accessible tools for smartphone or computer applications, allowing even untrained users to spot delamination points in frescoes.
Archaeologists have discovered numerous ceramic or clay whistles at Aztec sites, dubbed "death whistles" because of their distinctive skull shapes. A new paper published in the journal Communications Psychology examines the acoustical elements of the unique shrieking sounds produced by those whistles, as well as how human listeners are emotionally affected by the sounds. The findings support the hypothesis that such whistles may have been used in Aztec religious rituals or perhaps as mythological symbols.


Archaeologists unearthed the first Aztec death whistles, also known as ehecachichtlis, in 1999 while excavating the Tlatelolco site in Mexico City. They found the body of a sacrificial victim, a 20-year-old male who had been beheaded, at the base of the main stairway of a temple dedicated to the wind god Ehecatl. The skeleton was clutching two ceramic skull-shaped whistles, one in each hand, along with other artifacts. More skull whistles were subsequently found, and they've found their way into popular culture. For instance, in Ghostbusters: Afterlife (2021), Egon Spengler had such a whistle in his secret laboratory collection.


Scholars have puzzled over the purpose of the skull whistles, although given the dearth of concrete evidence, most suggestions are highly speculative. One hypothesis is that it was used in battle, with hundreds of warriors blowing their whistles simultaneously as a battle cry. Music archaeologist Arnd Adje Both has dismissed that idea, suggesting instead that the whistle's purpose was more likely tied to ceremonial or religious practices, like human sacrifice. Yet another hypothesis proposes that the whistles were intended as symbols of a deity. The skull shape, for instance, might allude to the Aztec god of the underworld, Mictlantecuhtli.


Aztec death whistles don't fit into any existing Western classification for wind instruments; they seem to be a unique kind of "air spring" whistle, based on CT scans of some of the artifacts. Sascha Frühholz, a cognitive and affective neuroscientist at the University of Zürich, and several colleagues wanted to learn more about the physical mechanisms behind the whistle's distinctive sound, as well as how humans perceive said sound—a field known as psychoacoustics. "The whistles have a very unique construction, and we don't know of any comparable musical instrument from other pre-Columbian cultures or from other historical and contemporary contexts," said Frühholz.
For their acoustic analysis, Frühholz et al. obtained sound recordings from two Aztec skull whistles excavated from Tlatelolco, as well as from three noise whistles (part of Aztec fire snake incense ladles). They took CT scans of whistles in the collection of the Ethnological Museum in Berlin, enabling them to create both 3D digital reconstructions and physical clay replicas. They were also able to acquire three additional artisanal clay whistles for experimental purposes.


Human participants then blew into the replicas with low-, medium-, and high-intensity air pressure, and the ensuing sounds were recorded. Those recordings were compared to existing databases of a broad range of sounds: animals, natural soundscapes, water sounds, urban noise, synthetic sounds (as for computers, pinball machines, printers, etc.), and various ancient instruments, among other samples. Finally, a group of 70 human listeners rated a random selection of sounds from a collection of over 2,500 samples.


The CT scans showed that skull whistles have an internal tube-like air duct with a constricted passage, a counter pressure chamber, a collision chamber, and a bell cavity. The unusual construction suggests that the basic principle at play is the Venturi effect, in which air (or a generic fluid) speeds up as it flows through a constricted passage, thereby reducing the pressure. "At high playing intensities and air speeds, this leads to acoustic distortions and to a rough and piercing sound character that seems uniquely produced by the skull whistles," the authors wrote.
That is consistent with the rough piercing sounds of the recordings of original skull whistles, per the authors. The spectral signal contains features of pink noise, along with high-pitched frequencies. There were only minor differences between recordings of the original skull whistles and the replicas. The whistle sound is most similar to natural sounds and electronic music effects, and least similar to other instruments like Mexican flutes. Animal, human, and synthetic sounds fall somewhere in between. Finally, the whistle sounds corresponded to a distinct pitch of the modulation power spectrum (MPS) with psychoacoustic significance, associated with primate screams, terrifying music, and the like.


Perhaps, then, it is not surprising that human listeners consistently rated skull whistle sounds as having negative emotional quality, as well as sounding largely unnatural, scary, or aversive. This was further bolstered by a follow-up experiment in which 32 participants listened to skull whistles and other sounds while undergoing an fMRI. Per Frühholz et al., there was a strong response in brain regions associated with the affective neural system, as well as regions that associate sounds with symbolic meaning. So the death whistles combine basic psycho-affective influences with more complex mental processes involving symbolism.


"This is consistent with the tradition of many ancient cultures to capture natural sounds in musical instruments, and could explain the ritual dimension of the death whistle sound for mimicking mythological entities," said Frühholz. "Unfortunately, we could not perform our psychological and neuroscientific experiments with humans from ancient Aztec cultures. But the basic mechanisms of affective response to scary sounds are common to humans from all historical contexts."