Since the Sandy Hook shooting last month and the national gun control debate it has reignited, there has been plenty of controversy over whether video games and violent media in general are a convenient distraction for the gun lobby or an area worthy of more study. But of all the thousands of words expended on the topic, the ones uttered by US Senator Lamar Alexander (R-TN) take the video game blame game to a whole new level.


Speaking with NBC News' Chuck Todd this morning, Alexander responded to a question about universal background checks with this amazing non-sequitur:


I think video games is a bigger problem than guns, because video games affect people. But the First Amendment limits what we can do about video games and the Second Amendment to the Constitution limits what we can do about guns.


First off, bonus points to Alexander right off the bat for mentioning gaming's First Amendment protections in practically the same breath as its supposed harms. That already puts him a step ahead of people like Missouri state Rep. Diane Franklin and others who want to single out violent video games for a tax that is likely unconsitutional. The comparison between the First Amendment and the Second Amendment here is actually a pretty good rhetorical flourish, and it's an interesting way of trying to convince traditional anti-gun advocates to see the gun-rights position from a different perspective (though I doubt it will change many people's minds in and of itself).


That little turn of phrase doesn't excuse the first part of the statement, though. The obvious implication of worrying more about games "because they affect people" is that guns have no effect on people—a dubious proposition, at best.


Even excepting that, though, the term "affect people" is so wishy washy here that it becomes practically meaningless. Yes, games do affect people, just like any work of art. But as the Supreme Court pointed out in its ruling granting games First Amendment protection, the demonstrated effects of violent games on youth in the scientific literature "are both small and indistinguishable from effects produced by other media."


Yet if Alexander had said, "I think TV is a bigger problem than guns, because TV affects people," he'd have been laughed out of the room. That's because TV has been an established part of the cultural landscape for the entire memory of almost every person alive today. Thus, TV's effects, both good and bad, are a well-known quantity to practically everyone. Video games, on the other hand, are still seen as a new and hard-to-understand media bogeyman by many of the elderly voters who vote in disproportionate numbers and, consequently, by many of the politicians they help put in office.


The fact is that we will probably have to put up with people in power making ridiculous statements like this for at least a decade or two more. But don't despair, gamers. There will come a time when we will have a president not much older than Mortal Kombat and a ruling class that grew up knowing the gaming medium was just one of a long line of moral panic scapegoats whose history can be traced back to the novel (PDF). Until then, just learn to accept these kinds of statements as part of the political background noise, and save your rage for the lawmakers who are actually trying to limit your freedoms.


ARS TECHNICA TEXT 2


After Bethesda revealed the "entirely online" Fallout 76 at E3 earlier this year, some franchise fans worried the new game would feel uncomfortably different from the story-driven, single-player post-apocalyptic action they know and love. After playing the game for about three hours at a preview event last week, I came away feeling like I was playing an elaborate Fallout 4 mod with some basic online features grafted on top.
Our preview experience started inside Vault 76 itself, an extremely messy space still reeling from a party celebrating the residents' impending departure into the post-nuclear wasteland of West Virginia. In the vault itself I could only see and talk to my three fellow team members as we all got our gear and viewed some basic tutorial content.


Once we stepped out of the vault, though, there were dozens of other survivors, all on their own teams, milling about and throwing built-in gestures to each other before setting off. Those gestures turn out to be the only way to directly communicate with players that aren't on my team, making the presence of so many other survivors feel like more of a nuisance than a meaningful addition off the bat (Bethesda developers on hand said voice chat with nearby non-team members was being worked on for post-launch).


Teamwork makes the dream work
To start, our team mostly ignored our fellow survivors and hiked into the West Virginia wilderness on our own. While the entire world was wide open to us, we generally hewed to the breadcrumb trail of a main quest line, which focused on finding a mysterious "overseer" leaving cryptic clues to her location. On the way, there was a lot of the usual foraging for survival materials, battling with mutated animal and zombie-like human antagonists, and discovering distracting side-quests.


Graphical concerns
Here at Ars, we try not to focus too much on aesthetic concerns when evaluating pre-release code, since a lot of final polish can still happen before a game is released. That said, the build of Fallout 76 that we played on the Xbox One X at this preview event suffered from some major, frequent frame rate dips in numerous situations. In both third- and first-person modes, we noticed significant screen-tearing and stuttering in a variety of not-too-strenuous situations.


There's still time for these kinds of technical concerns to be fixed, of course. But with a large beta launching later this month and a final release planned for November 14, that time is running low...


While the basic gameplay will feel extremely familiar to anyone who has played Fallout 4, working together as a team brings its own particular quirks. In battles, for instance, experience points are shared between all players who were able to get at least one shot in on the enemy. Every team member will be able to loot that dead enemy (and other item storage locations) individually, and each one gets their own semi-random set of items from that looting (based on their character level).
Having a full team of characters with different skills opened up the gameplay in some interesting ways at points. If one player had a strong lock-picking skill, for instance, they could unlock a safe and give everyone else access to what was inside. If another player buffed up their charisma, they were able to share perk cards with everyone on the team.


In one memorable dungeon, a mindless Super Mutant started firing at us from inside a locked cage, and we couldn't fire back until we unlocked it. The entire team started scrambling to look for the hidden code to unlock the door. When one team member found it, he read it off to another near the door, who opened it to allow for a third teammate to get the immediate critical headshot. Go team!


Working as a team has an effect on how you get around as well. Each team member can build their own Fallout 4-style camp, complete with places to rest, fires to cook food and purify water, and workbenches to convert foraged scrap items into useful items (not to mention fences and turrets to protect against antagonists). Team members can fast-travel to anyone else's camp for free, encouraging teammates to spread out their bases around the massive map. You can fast-travel to the team leader for free as well, but warping to other discovered locations (or fellow teammates) requires spending in-game caps.


Playing live with other people also brings changes to the V.A.T.S. system, which now operates in real time. Tapping the V.A.T.S. button in combat still brings up the usual green-highlighted limb-targeting system (using the right stick to change your aim), but both you and the target continue to move at full speed as you try to maximize the displayed chance at a successful shot. In my short time trying, the whole thing felt pretty cumbersome, and it was a lot harder than usual to get those high-percentage shots off. In any case, players who want to slow down and consider their shots are out of luck here.


In general, though, wandering around the wasteland with three other people is a lot less lonely than the usual Fallout experience. Everything from multiplayer battles to scrounging for items or figuring out clues feels more dynamic and engaging with other people joining in. While it feels like you could play Fallout 76 by yourself, I'm not sure I'd really want to after playing with a group.


Apocalypse is other people
Outside of my three teammates, the presence of all those other people on the server became most relevant during a few timed, server-wide events, which tasked everyone in the area with taking on a huge horde of enemies in a marked section of the map. The idea is for everyone from disparate teams to come together against the challenge and share in the big dump of experience points when complete. It all felt a little hollow, though, thanks in part to the limited communication options between teams.


Players from different teams can trade items with each other via in-game menus, and there were a few high-level Bethesda developers on the server that were eager to essentially gift us some wacky in-game outfits for the event. In the live game, though, I'm guessing the player base will have fewer benevolent traders and more determined griefers eager to try to ruin the experience of their fellow players.


Combat between players doesn't unlock until level 5, thankfully, so the initial moments out of the vault aren't a deluge of experimental bullets. Even after that point, shooting another player that's not on your team only does extremely minor "chip damage," regardless of the weapon or relative character levels of the two players involved. This makes it quite difficult to outright murder another player that doesn't want to be killed. When that does happen, however, the murderer gets marked prominently on the map and becomes susceptible to lucrative revenge killings from anyone else on the server.


True PvP combat only starts if the griefer's target fires back at their assailant, at which point it's kill or be killed with full damage potential. The stakes for these PvP battles seem pretty low, though—the victor simply gets to pick up a bag containing whatever scrap the killed player was carrying at the time (the stakes of death against the environment seem similarly low—it seems relatively easy to simply respawn to your team leader, pick up your scrap, and move on as if nothing happened). There's also a default "pacifist mode" to prevent players from accidentally shooting back at their assailants and inadvertently initiating a battle.


Bethesda seems to have put a lot of thought into preventing trolling, but we're sure determined players will still find a way to be a nuisance to fellow players—setting off nearby enemy sentries during stealth sections, perhaps. The potential for these kinds of negative experiences, combined with the general lack of positives we can see from having a wider server population, already has us looking forward to the planned post-launch rollout of private servers that we can roam alone in small, unbothered cooperative teams.


What's the story?
A three-hour preview isn't enough to get a feel for the grand sweep of Fallout 76's story, which the developers said will take dozens of hours to complete. That said, we did get a feel for how the online game would change the series' storytelling structure.


The most striking difference is the lack of other non-mutated humans in the game. Since the players themselves represent the first vault-dwellers to ever leave the safety of a shelter, there's a distinct lack of non-player characters to move the story along. Instead, there are a lot of Bioshock-style holotapes to find, telling the stories of the people who survived the war initially but eventually perished to the fallout.


There were a lot of nods toward this kind of environmental storytelling in our short preview. You'll stumble on a town and slowly unravel what happened to its citizens in the wake of nuclear war by listening to tapes and finding bits and pieces left behind by the long-gone citizens. Robotic shop-keepers and assistants are also around to help fill in the gaps, as are the usual messages and other detritus found on terminals.


At the end of our preview, we got to see a sample of what a nuclear launch looked like in the game. High-level characters will eventually be able to launch these on the maps themselves, irradiating a sizable portion of the map for three hours (and killing anyone not smart or fast enough to get away from the telegraphed blast). A lot of the end-game content will focus on these nuclear blasts, the developers on hand said, with those strong enough to survive the radiation zone hunting powerful Scorch Beasts and finding the most powerful weapons and gear.


The developers were also quick to note that this is not Fallout 5, a game that is still being planned as the traditional single-player, story-driven adventure. The implication, it seems, is that not everyone may enjoy the additional focus on survival and teamwork of this online experiment. After this quick preview, we're looking forward to seeing more fully how that experiment shakes out next month.


ARS TECHNICA TEXT 3
Originally announced way back in 2014 for a 2016 launch, Crackdown 3 has certainly taken its time in finally reaching Xbox One and Windows PC players this week. Despite all that time in the proverbial oven, though, Crackdown 3 comes out feeling dated and half-baked—though it's still a fun world to jump around in.
This time around, the super-powered agents of, uh, The Agency, are unleashing their carnage-filled version of justice on the secluded city of New Providence. The metropolis is controlled by Terra Nova, an immensely powerful corporation that apparently organized a blackout of every major city in the world (and incinerated most of the Agency agents dispatched to stop them) in order to attract new citizens to their futuristic haven. Once there, though, these refugees find they're forced to exist as impoverished grist for Terra Nova's economic mill, enriching company executives who live in relative opulence.


The stratified architecture found in the different regions of New Providence provides some important grounding for the battle between the haves and have-nots that the Agency finds itself in. For the most part, though, the game is annoyingly blunt about telling—rather than showing—how your actions are inspiring the proletariat to "rise up" against their authoritarian masters (throwing in plenty of "edgy-for-a-thirteen-year-old" random cursing along the way).


Free some dissidents from jail, for instance, and a voice in your ear immediately tells you how they will help "take the fight to Terra Nova." But I can only recall one time in my play-through when I actually saw citizens taking up arms against their corporate masters (rather ineffectually, I might add). Shut down a mining operation for Chimera—a poisonous weapon Terra Nova gathers for vast profits—and you're reminded how it will disrupt the company's plans without ever really seeing that effect in the city itself.


The plot takes some pains to try to set up a relatable critique of income inequality and the power-distorting effects of runaway capitalism but only manages it in the most ham-fisted and nuance-free way. The handful of company higher-ups that serve as bosses are, to a person, cliche-filled scenery-chewing bad guys who monomaniacally want to amass power. They all scream and snarl their way through extremely hackneyed lines; one literally says they "just want to watch the world burn" at one point. Another echoes Mengele in his desire to conduct Chimera experiments on "lesser" people.


Run and jump
You probably didn't come to a new Crackdown game for a nuanced story, though. At its heart, Crackdown 3 isn't that different from the two open-world run-and-gun titles that preceded it. You're still completing objectives that are all variations on killing enemy agents, blowing things up, or getting quickly from point A to point B.


As with those earlier titles, what really sets Crackdown 3 apart from the open-world pack is the locomotion. You start with an extremely floaty jump that lets you ascend three or four times your height and cover dozens of yards in a single leap. As the game progresses your running and jumping capabilities get faster and higher, with the added bonus of triple jump jetpack assistance and the ability to string two quick air dashes to add speed and distance in mid-air.


The sheer freedom of movement for a leveled-up agent brings to mind the best parts of traversing a game like Spider-Man or the Batman: Arkham games, but with less complexity. I will say, though, that I'd kill for a decent wall-jump ability to be added to the free-moving repertoire here. Sliding ineffectually down a wall just feels sad after a huge, city-clearing jump.


Improving your mobility means finding glowing green agility orbs, hundreds of which are peppered throughout the city. They're so numerous you'll likely stumble across plenty on your way to completing other objectives, but hunting down the well-hidden, out-of-the-way ones ends up being the game's greatest joy. I would often explicitly ignore whatever nearby location the game wanted me to blow up just to aimlessly explore the well-arranged architecture, leaping from rooftop to rooftop searching out more orbs, which would make it even easier to jump to more rooftops for more orbs.


There are a few flies in this smooth run-and-jump ointment, though. Most notably, the game can be extremely touchy about letting you grab onto ledges unless you're perfectly aligned with the grab point. Your agent will also sometimes get stuck on a piece of architecture as they try to ascend, adding an annoying hitch to the traversal. And trying to land on a small platform can be a bit cumbersome, thanks to a too-close camera angle that requires constant mid-air adjustment to align your landing view.


Less than explosive combat
If the movement has occasional annoyances, though, the combat only has occasional moments of non-annoyance. First among the problems is the finicky lock-on system, which is key to focusing fire amid the chaos. The lock-on rarely worked as seamlessly as I'd have expected. Sometimes I'd jam on the lock-on button when staring right at an enemy only to have nothing happen. Other times I'd lock on to another far-off enemy that I didn't mean to target. Then there were times I'd lock on to far-off objects for no reason, without even hitting the targeting button. This made combat much more of a chore than it should have been.


Multiplayer mayhem
Before launch, Ars was given a couple of hours to try out Crackdown 3's online multiplayer "Wrecking Zone" mode. The most interesting bit here is the extremely destructible environments, which Microsoft says are powered by its Azure server architecture. Cutting out holes in walls and feeling the ground crumble beneath your feet adds an interesting twist to the otherwise pretty bog-standard team-based games of Agent Hunter (read: Deathmatch) and Territories (read: Hardpoint).
There's definitely some appeal in being able to use jump pads and aerial locomotion to get the drop on the opposing team from high above. And the lock-on system provides a bit of important directional warning when an enemy is targeting you, giving you more chance to escape or turn and fight than some shooters. Our brief time testing left us interested in trying more after launch.


The real problem with the combat, though, is its general lack of any feeling of impact. Both hitting and being hit by enemies often feels utterly weightless, with only a slowly reducing health bar and a small red arrow or damage number indicating anything has happened (the too-close over-the-shoulder camera, which makes it hard to gauge attacks coming from behind, doesn't help). Enemies will take melee attacks without budging until they die, then suddenly go flying like rag dolls. Even a huge boulder thrown by an opposing mech lands with all the force of a wet ball of toilet paper.


Then there are the enemies themselves—all reliably dumb as dirt. Most will just stand or shuffle around ineffectively, firing when you get in range. Not that I can exactly blame them; Crackdown 3 environments for the most part aren't really built around taking cover or even dodging effectively. Instead, you're more or less expected to run in and take out enemies as quickly as possible while soaking up their return fire like a sponge. Each enemy downed gives orbs that refill your shield in proportion to their difficulty, so as long as you're constantly killing something in the immediate vicinity, you're practically invincible.


Success, then, depends on your ability to efficiently take out whatever enemies are nearby. Your ability to take out enemies in turn depends heavily on how much you've leveled up your various skills. The more you use explosives, guns, and melee attacks, the stronger those types of attacks become. The game accounts for this by scattering the same handful of enemy types across the map, but at highly variable power levels.


This has the odd side effect of essentially putting you in charge of your own difficulty curve. Each objective is marked on the map with its own "chance of success," measuring how over or underpowered you are for the challenge on offer. Go in to an objective with a 20 percent chance of success, and a couple of enemy attacks will quickly down you. Go in with an 80 percent chance of success, and even powerful attacks will bounce off your toughened armor as you tear through enemies like they're made of tissue paper.


There's a sweet spot somewhere in the middle that hits just the right point on the challenge curve, where making your way through is tough but not impossible work. But the game's fully open map structure doesn't exactly guide you to the correct objectives at the right times. It's quite possible to unknowingly level past the appropriate "challenge point" for a number of the game's objectives (or stumble into objectives that are way beyond your current level). Sure, there's some visceral joy in tearing through enemies like a vengeful god, but being that overpowered gets old kind of fast.


When you're not dealing with combat-related annoyances, there is some fun to be had just running and jumping through Crackdown's brutally beautiful authoritarian world, looking for shiny orbs. It's too bad that this is only half of this half-baked game.


The Good
* Beautiful architecture and a well-rendered futuristic metropolis
* The sheer joy of triple-jumping and air-dashing
* Hundreds of hidden orbs are a delight to hunt and find
* Multiplayer mode has some intriguing twists on the usual team-based combat
The Bad
* Blunt storytelling constantly tells without showing
* Frustrating combat with a wonky lock-on system
* Brain-dead enemy AI leads to mindless action
* Inconsistent challenge scaling can lead to disjointed difficulty spikes
The Ugly
* Hearing a voice in your ear saying "Ooooh, I like that weapon" for the 20th time
Verdict: There are better ways to get your superhero action fix, but there are worse ones, too. Crackdown 3 is at least worth a try.


ARS TECHNICA TEXT 4
Many people remember specific, weird things about September 11, 2001. For me, it was a headline about stamps tucked into the chaos.


As I started to absorb the horror of the day through TV and online news sources that Tuesday morning, I noticed an odd inflection point highlighted on the Washington Post's list of "Top News" links. While the first three stories were blaring headlines about the terrorist attacks, I remember clearly that the fourth was a news brief about the threat of postal stamp rate increase, the last trivial story published before all other news got pushed aside indefinitely.


I wanted to quickly share this lighthearted observation with my circle of friends, and in 2001 I only had one easy, surefire way to do that online. I brought up AOL Instant Messenger, opened the menu, and chose "Edit Profile." That's where I shared links to the Post's top four stories at the time and warned my friends not to miss the important postal news amid the other stuff going on (I also included a semi-apologetic note that I hoped the lighthearted joke would be a welcome distraction on such a dark day).


Looking back now, I realize that AIM profile was my first ephemeral blog. Going to college in the years before ubiquitous mobile text messaging and social media profiles, AIM's Away Messages and profile pages became a proto-social network for me and a group of peers looking for ways to keep easy tabs on each other. Friday's announcement that AIM would finally shut down after 20 years got me thinking about how we used it to share our status updates years before the online world would be dominated by Twitter, Facebook, and the constant newsfeed.


Nice to meet you, what’s your screen name?
My family got our first AOL account in 1996, when I was a freshman in high school. I don't recall using Instant Messaging for much in those days, aside from occasional consulting with colleagues working on my Super Mario Bros. fan site. My high school friends actually gravitated to ICQ and the school's Unix cluster to type messages to each other over dial-up modems.


When I started college in late 2000, though, everyone I met seemed to have an AOL "screen name," which by that point didn't require a paid AOL account. Sharing that screen name became more common than sharing a phone number when meeting someone new, and AIM quickly became the default way to talk to people when you didn't want to pick up the phone (which, for me, was most of the time).
It's hard to remember now just how freeing it was to be able to communicate instantly without the formality of an actual phone call. Carrying on multiple conversations at once, multitasking between chatting and "surfing the web," and pausing long enough to compose well-thought replies (but not so long that the recipient began to worry) were all brave new frontiers in communication through a much-too-heavy CRT monitor.


Using AIM also meant mastering the etiquette of the Away Message. In the days before we were all tethered to an Internet-enabled device 24/7, we used Away Messages to let others know that we couldn't respond to an Instant Message, while still leaving the computer online in order to receive messages that could be viewed later.


Users with Away Messages up appeared with a little yellow sticky note next to their screen names on AIM's "Buddy List," showing that they were online but not actually around. If you sent a message to someone with an Away Message up, you'd get an instant response notifying you of that fact. You could also set up an Away Message to go up automatically if your computer was idle for too long, in case you stepped away from the computer without thinking.


Getting creative
Away Messages could be customized for the situation and saved for later use. A lot of the early Away Message use in my group of friends was merely functional: "Away at class," or "I'm asleep," or "I'm hanging out down the hall, come join us!" People soon began using their Away Messages as a form of creative self-expression. "Sleeping the sleep of the just (plain exhausted)" was a favorite, as was "Hi ho, hi ho, it's off to class I go." People would also throw up song lyrics, poem quotes, or complete non-sequiturs in lieu of actual information about their whereabouts. I'm sure I had a few Space Ghost: Coast to Coast Away Messages that confused a good deal of my friends.


If you really wanted to get creative with your online persona, though, you had to dive into your AIM profile. This was where you could post text and links that were a little more permanent than an Away Message and available whenever the account was online (which was more-or-less all the time, thanks the brave new world of the campus' broadband network). Seeing a user's profile took a little more work than seeing an Away Message, though; you had to right-click on the username and choose "View Profile" to bring them up one by one (this menu option also let you view the details of an Away Message without having to send an actual message).


While some people kept their profiles unedited for years, many used it as a Twitter-like running diary. One of my friends kept a constantly updated "Thought of the Day" with one-liners picked from overheard quotes and remembered readings. Some used it to post shout-outs to best friends or throw passive-aggressive shade against some unnamed member of the group (but you knew who they were talking about). I often used the space to link to recent photos taken with my first digital camera or game reviews and stories I had published in the student newspaper. Overuse of fancy fonts, colors, and emoticons turned plenty of AIM profiles into crimes against graphic design.


Profile stalking
For much of college, the first thing I would do when I sat down at the computer was go down my AIM friends list and check the profiles and Away Messages to see what was new with everyone. Scanning through profile pages became an easy way to procrastinate when writing a dull paper late at night, presaging the compulsion of scanning Twitter to distract from any sort of boredom (though there was no easy way to quickly figure out which AIM profiles had been updated, meaning you re-read plenty of "old" updates).


Well before Facebook-stalking was a thing, "profile stalking" became slang in my group of friends for any Instant Messenger contact that you didn't talk to but checked up on through the "View Profile" menu. My parents eventually used my frequent profile updates as a sign that I was alive when I hadn't bothered to call home in a few days. At least one of my fellow dorm residents set up a second AIM account just for his friends after his parents started asking him about the risqué content he shared on his profile.


The most striking thing about the profile page, though, was how ephemeral it all was. With limited space to work with, posting something new in your profile usually meant deleting something old (there was even a brief trend of people using "SubProfile" software to slightly expand their profile posting space). AOL Instant Messenger didn't have any built-in way to store old profiles, either. Like Snapchat images, old profiles were not meant to be cherished and archived online but to be thrown to the digital abyss after a while. Today, people who use automated tools to delete old tweets know that there were some benefits to this design.


It seems quaint now, in a world where the US president broadcasts his every thought to millions via social media. After I graduated college, tools like Facebook and Twitter quickly replaced the functions that used to be filled by AIM profile stalking, and programs like Google Chat and text messaging replaced the direct communication portion (especially as more mobile phone providers started offering unlimited SMS plans). Though I still have my AIM account online and connected via Trillian, very few people use it to contact me these days.


Looking back years later, though, it's funny to think how AOL almost certainly didn't intend for Instant Messenger to be used the way me and my friends used it. As the name implies, the program was created as a way for users to send short, "instant" text messages to each other. That was useful, of course, but it was the secondary features—the Away Messages and profiles—that let AIM evolve into much more for a group of early 2000s college kids learning to use an always-on Internet connection for the first time.


As the world says goodbye to AIM over the next few months, I'll remember it for my first taste of how the Internet could enable asynchronous self-expression and personal broadcasting amid a tight-knit social group.




ARS TECHNICA TEXT 5
As someone who has been following the growth of generative AI for a while now, I know that the technology can be pretty good (if not quite human-level) at quickly summarizing complex documents into a more digestible form. But I still wasn't prepared for how disarmingly compelling it would be to listen to Google's NotebookLM condense my recent book about Minesweeper into a tight, 12.5-minute, podcast-style conversation between two people who don't exist.


There are still enough notable issues with NotebookLM's audio output to prevent it from fully replacing professional podcasters any time soon. Even so, the podcast-like format is an incredibly engaging and endearing way to take in complex information and points to a much more personable future for generative AI than the dry back-and-forth of a text-based chatbot.


Hey! Listen!
Google's NotebookLM launched over a year ago as "a virtual research assistant that can summarize facts, explain complex ideas, and brainstorm new connections—all based on the sources you select." Just last week, though, Google added the new "Audio Overview" feature that it's selling as "a new way to turn your documents into engaging audio discussions."


Google doesn't use the word "podcast" anywhere in that announcement, instead talking up audio creations that "summarize your material, make connections between topics, and banter back and forth." But Wharton AI professor Ethan Mollick correctly referred to the style as a "podcast" in a recent social media post sharing a NotebookLM Audio Overview of his book. Mollick called these Audio Summaries "the current best 'wow this is amazing & useful' demo of AI" and "unnerving, too," and we agree on both counts.


Inspired by Mollick's post, I decided to feed my own book into NotebookLM to see what its virtual "podcasters" would make of 30,000 or so words about '90s Windows gaming classic Minesweeper (believe it or not, I could have written much more). Just a few minutes later, I was experiencing a reasonable facsimile of what it would be like if I was featured on NPR's Pop Culture Happy Hour or a similar banter-filled podcast.


Just the facts?
NotebookLM's summary hits on all the book's major sections: the pre-history of the games that inspired Minesweeper; the uphill battle for the Windows Entertainment Pack at a business-focused Microsoft of the '90s; the moral panic over the game's pre-installation on millions of business and government computers; and the surprising cheating controversies that surrounded the game's competitive scene.


Sure, I could quibble about which specific bits the summary decided to focus on and/or leave out (maybe feeding different chapters individually would have led to more detail in the collected summaries). But anyone listening to this "podcast" would get the same general overview of my book that they would listening to one of the many actual podcasts that I did after the book launched.
While there weren't any full-blown, whole-cloth hallucinations in NotebookLM's summary "podcast," there were a few points where it got small details wrong or made assumptions that weren't supported in the text. Discussing Minesweeper predecessor Mined-Out, for instance, NotebookLM's audio summary says, "So this is where those squares and flags start to come into play..." even though Mined-Out had neither feature.


Then there's the portion where the summary-cast mentions a senator who called Minesweeper "a menace to the republic," repeating the quote for emphasis. That definitely captures the spirit of Senator Lauch Faircloth's tirade against Minesweeper and other games being pre-installed on government computers. In the "podcast" context, though, it sounds like the voices are putting words in Faircloth's mouth by sharing a direct quote.


Small, overzealous errors like these—and a few key bits of the book left out of the podcast entirely—would give me pause if I were trying to use a NotebookLM summary as the basis for a scholarly article or piece of journalism. But I could see using a summary like this to get some quick Cliff's Notes-style grounding on a thick tome I didn't have the time or inclination to read fully. And, unlike poring through Cliff's Notes, the pithy, podcast-style format would actually make for enjoyable background noise while out on a walk or running errands.


It’s all in the delivery
It's that naturalistic, bantering presentation that makes NotebookLM's new feature stand out from other AI products that generate capable text summaries. I felt like I was eavesdropping on two people who just happened to be discussing my book in a cafe, except those people don't actually exist (and were probably algorithmically designed to praise the book).


Right from the start, I was tickled by the way one "podcast host" described the book as a tale from "the land of floppy disks and dial-up modems" (a phrase I did not use in the book). That same voice goes on to tease "a bit of Bill Gates sneaking around the Microsoft office," up front, hinting at my absolute favorite anecdote from the book before fully exploring it later in the summary.


When they do get to that anecdote, the fake podcast hosts segue in with what feels like a natural conversational structure:


Voice 1: It's hard to deny the impact of something when your own CEO is secretly hooked.
Voice 2: Wait, are we talking about Bill Gates?


The back-and-forth style of the two-person "podcast" format allows for some entertaining digressions from the main point of the book, too. When discussing the wormy movie-star damsel-in-distress featured in Minesweeper predecessor Mined-Out, for instance, the AI summarizers seem to get a little distracted:


Voice 1: I have to ask, what kind of movies does a worm even star in?
Voice 2: I'm afraid that detail has been lost to the sands of gaming history.


Then there's the casual way the two "hosts" bring up the improved versions of Minesweeper that were crafted to fix problems with Microsoft's original:


Voice 1: So eventually the community came up with a more elegant solution.
Voice 2: Let me guess. They created a new version of Minesweeper.
Voice 1: Exactly.
Voice 2: Called it a day on the old one.


The two-person format helps foster a gentle, easy rhythm to the presentation of dense information, with natural-sounding pauses and repetition that help emphasize key points. When one ersatz podcaster talks about the phenomenon of "this incredibly addictive puzzle game [being] pre-installed on practically every computer," for instance, the other voice can answer back with the phrase "on every computer" with just the right amount of probing interest. Or when one AI voice intones that "it was discovered that the original Minesweeper had a flaw in how it generated random boards," the other voice jumps in and exclaims "A flaw!" with pitch-perfect timing and a sense of surprise.


Wait, are we talking about Bill Gates?
NotebookLM podcast voice
There are some problems with this back-and-forth style, though. For one, both voices seem to alternate between the "I read the book" role and the "I'm surprised at these book facts you're sharing" role, making it hard to feel like either one is genuine. For another, the sheer volume of surprised reactions (a partial sample: "What? No! Wooooow! You're kidding! No way! You're blowing my mind here!") can get a little grating. And then there are the sentences that pause at the wrong points or the bits of laughter that feel like an editor chopped them off prematurely.


Still, when one fake podcast voice cooed, "Oh, do tell!" in response to the idea of controversy in competitive Minesweeper, it set off the same parasocial relationship buttons that a good, authentic podcast can (while also effectively flattering my sense of authorial ego).


After listening to NotebookLM's summary of my own book, I can easily envision a near future where these "fake" podcasts become a part of my real podcast diet, especially for books or topics that are unlikely to get professional interest from human podcasters. By repackaging generative AI text into a "just two people chatting" format, Google has put a much more amiable face on what can sometimes seem like a dehumanizing technology.